



I recently watched 'extinction' on ABC with David Attenbrough. I haven't watched any grim documentaries in quite a long time, and this one was quite brutal to watch. The reduction of biodiversity at such a high rate & the consequences of this, not just economic & health related such as the potential for more outbreaks of diseases, but the loss of something that was here before we were here - the value inherent in nature for nature's sake - is quite hard to fathom.  

At the end of the documentary they gave a few suggestions of what you can do to help. These are always a bit 'weak sauce', like stop wasting water, recycle, don't buy fur coats, eat less meat etc. But surely there are better ways to help? There are the classic examples like: protesting, writing to your politician & donating to charities, and newer examples like creating social entreprises. I wanted to concentrate on what new ways are there to do 'more good'?  And there is a movement around this - Effective Alturism. 

It takes a more scientific approach to charitable giving. By caluculating the different ways one can help, and working out the amount of 'good' they can do, you can work out ways you can be more effective with your donations.  One suprising result from effective alturism is that if you're in a position to get a high paying job, you can quintuple your 'good' through effective donations (that is to charirites that have been deemed effective) then if you volunteered on the ground yourself. 

I wanted to know if this thinking had been applied to conservation efforts & biodiversity loss. It looks like it is still in early stages so I thought I would give a go at working out where effective donations could go to help conservation efforts. 

The biggest loss of biodivesity is through land clearance like the Amazon for cattle & palm oil farms, the potential for devastation and disturbance through drilling in the Yukon delta National Wildlife Refuge & on the Great Barrier Reef.  Keeping untouched wildernesses untouched are going to get bigger wins for overall biodiversity then trying to perserve already fragmented land (although is still very needed).   

One way to stop these are to reduce the economic incentive to do these things. If oil isn't valuable anymore, there isn't an incentive to drill. If there isn't a need for palm oil, there isn't an incentive to clear the land.   

Although there are so many solutions to this, one way to reduce the incentive to land clearing is to give money to poor farmers. In this documentary https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0465vqh where an english man buys 100 acres of peru rainforest, even though he owns the forest, it still gets logged for cacao farming & gold mining - it turns out there are alot more things at play then just owning the forest in order to save it. By reducing the core incentive to do these things, then relying on barriers to stop people doing them, I think is a good route to take.

One charity deemed effective is "Give Directly", which is a direct cash transfer to poor farmers to spend it how they want.  Although this charity is only to people in Africa, a similar thing could be warrented for farmers clearing land for cattle, cacao & palm oil. 


The idea behind Effective Alturism is being more scientific & sceptical about the ways we can do good in the world, and through hypothesises, theories, research and understanding the situations better, we can actually be more effective at doing more good. 

If anyone has any more information on ways to be more effective in helping preserve biodiversity please comment!


Some more links related to Effective Alturism: 

https://www.givewell.org/ - searches for the charities that save or improve lives the most per dollar.

https://www.givingwhatwecan.org/best-charities-to-donate-to-2020/ - list of best charities to donate to in 2020

https://www.givingwhatwecan.org/ money pledge - where you pledge 10% of your income and they put it to best use. 



  









