Each person has space to build there tiny home or live in a caravan.

Families enouraged to have a family member:
1. in the real world making money
2. remote work from the village 
3. craft businesses or home style businesses (animal products)
4. No online presence just working with kids and animals and food systems.  

Each person is encouraged to share skills they know in the forms of lessons either handyman style stuff, or art based or computer based. 

Emphasis on working with hands? 

Sharing: 

Knowledge: 
self-improvement
self-awareness - meditation, yoga 
building - repairing houses, DIY on houses, natural housing methods
nature skills - wilderness, camping, hunting (bow & arrows, or guns), Id plant specimens
Sports/ Althetics 
Health - naturopath, nutritionist, taking control of ones health
Electronics
Computers 


Food reliance skills - gardening, food forests, fungal systems, composting
Animal systems - keeping animals, bucthering
Cooking 

Art:  Have a dedicated room for art - book in on a online portal
Drawing 
Painting 
Pottery  
Bone carving or wood carving 

outdoor sports skills - rafting, rock climbing, fishing, sailing

Group learning through science:
Shared telescope for astronomy - someone who takes control of the astronomy 'program' and finds out about best time to star gaze etc.

Weekly dicussions on topic of choice for people to come listen & ask questions - LIFE LONG LEARNING



Child raising: 

Shared child raising and responsiblities - kids get to know other parents. 
Multi-generational kids learning together - art sessions (painting), 

Nothing mandatory - just encourage for people to self guide and take responsbility 


Spaces: 

Nature playground for kids
Boulder wall for adults & kids? 
Shared kitchen area where you can have group meals or people just sharing the kitchen like at the caravan park - emphasis on individuality
Sauna? 
Gym of some sort
Music room (like at schools)

Pool or natural swimming hole

Multi generational living:
- Grand parents
- Adults with kids
- Adults without kids
- children 

Could have weekly or fornightly markets to sell goods people have made - don't have to travel with your goods & services, people come to you


Energy:
Solar
Combustion stoves

Solar passive construction of houses with low impact building materials. 


People in SA:

Matt & Sophie? 
Holly & partner



