FIRE SAFETY:

1. Seal all gaps with silicon mastic & flywire.

Since ember entry into the roof cavity or under
floor spaces is the most common cause of houses
burning in bushfires, a good level of finish and
detail in all fashings, timber cladding and crawl
spaces are classic retrofit opportunities.

Silicone mastic and flywire are the two most
useful materials in sealing gaps. Silicone is fire
resistant, while flywire can screen vents and
openings or be used as a substrate for silicone
when filling in larger gaps.

2. Use double glazed windows 

Double glazed window panels with outer sheets of
toughened glass are now so cheap that upgrading
windows for thermal efficiency and bushfire safety
is a retrofit worth considering, especially for large
windows exposed to prevailing winds. Windowpanes
and panels bedded on silicone have better shock
resistance than those bedded in traditional putty.
The main problem is that double glazed panels
with an optimal gap for thermal insulation are too
thick to fit in most window frames. Alternatively,
fixing a sheet of toughened glass to an existing
window frame with silicone mastic can create
homemade double glazing. 

3. External metal flywire doors 

4. Removing fine fuels for fire to use 

Controlling fine fuels such as dry
foliage, twigs and dead grass by
collection, compaction and/or
chipping and composting during
the winter should also be part of
your fire safety strategy. 

5. Smaller trees

Limiting the size and type
of large trees in gardens (as
suggested for optimising food
production) reduces the load of
fine fuels during the fire season
and the chances of damage to
buildings in firestorm conditions

6. Plant food trees

Food plants naturally have high cell moisture and
mineral content. They also have relatively little
in the way of flammable essential oils, resins,
phenols and other plant chemicals that make most
Australian native species so combustible.

7. Increase Soil Fertility 

Soil fertility strategies that increase the depth,
tilth, humus and mineral content of soil contribute
to fire safety by increasing water storage in the
soil thus reducing stress on plants in droughts
and severe bushfire weather. This moisture allows
plants to transpire water12 and resist being desiccated enough to burn. Furthermore, higher and
better balanced mineral fertility in the soil (and
thus plant tissue) acts as a fire retardant. 

8. Garden ponds that take overflow from water tanks

Ponds, outside baths, sinks, greywater systems and
even liquid manure barrels can all provide backup
emergency water storage. Rosemary Morrow’s
property retrofits in the Blue Mountains included
large water ponds taking overflow from tanks and
greywater treatment ponds. These help to reduce
hazard and provide backup water for firefighting in
one of the most fire-prone regions of Australia. 

9. Tidy up before the bush fire season

Tidying up each season will reduce obstacles
to firefighting in difficult conditions, hazards in
strong winds and fuel that can burn and release
toxic fumes.

10. Managing Adjacent lands

- appropriate management of ground fuels and
understorey vegetation (mostly with mowing
or grazing animals) - grazing animals on the commons

- judicious harvesting of fire-prone eucalypts
and replacement with fire-retardant deciduous
trees

- rehydration of slopes and watercourses to
absorb urban stormwater.

## References 

https://www.milkwood.net/2020/11/16/radical-hope-bushfire-resources-for-a-la-nina-year/