CBT: 

Two parts: 

1. Connecting thoughts to feelings. Feelings are due to the thoughts you have - how you interpret events that happen to you. 
a: Observe your thoughts, see the thought causing the reaction. 
b: Be skeptical about the validility of that thought. Is is true? 
c:  Set up experiments to test wether the belief is true. It is seeing your belief as not true, that allows you to move on. 

2. Mindfullness:  
a: Moving awareness/focus to things in the world - getting outside of your self. Strengthening your focusing muscle.  
b: Letting thoughts pass by like a train passing by. Not engaging with them, just seeing them pass by & not passing judgement on them - can gently touch them as thoughts or feelings. 




---------------------------------------------------------------

- Things go wrong with our bodies, so why don't we think things can go wrong with our minds 

- The success of CBT is largely due to the educational aspects of CBT than other psychotherapy - the revieve alot of information to become _their own therapists_ 

- Central concept of CBT is _you feel the way you think_. That is you can live more happily and productivley by thinking in more positive ways

-  CBT encourages clients to become scientists - you treat your throughts as theories and hunches about reality that should be tested, rather than facts 

- CBT recongnises people hold values & beliefs about themselves, the world & other people - they way they interpret their surroundings. One of the aims of CBT is to help people develop flexible, non-extreme & self-helping beliefs that help them adapt to relality & pursue their goals. Not beliefs & values that cause hinderence in their emotional happieness & well-being.


--------------------------------------------------------------

Spotting Thought Patterns:

--------------------------

1. Turning Moutains back into Molehills - Catastrophising events interpreting as something bigger than they actually are

- Ways to negate this:

1. Put you throughts into perspective - change the story you have about the event, maybe not as bad as you think
2. Consider less terryfying explanations - 
3. Weigh up the evidence - what evidence do you actually have to support what your thinking? 
4. Focus on what you can do to cope with the situation - what can you do to allieve the events

"No matter how great a travesty you create in your mind, the world’s unlikely
to end because of it even if the travesty comes to pass. You’re probably far
more capable of surviving embarrassing and painful events than you give
yourself credit for – human beings can be very resilient"

-----------------------------

2. All-or-nothing thinking: Finding somewhere between 

Black & White thinking. People love you or they hate you. Your totally responsibley free or totally guilty. 

- Ways to negate this:

1. Be realistic - Eating One doughnut doesn't ruin your diet. Be realistic about what actually happened.
2. Develop 'both-and' reasoning skills - You can _both_ succeed in education _and_ fail a few tests.   You can Both assume your an OK person and strive to change in specific ways. Your not a bad person until I do this thing. I won't be happy until I get this thing. 

Beaware of 'either/or' statements, (you want 'either/and' statments) and global labels as 'bad/good'. 


-----------------------------

3. Fortune Telling: Step away from the crystal ball

You create negative forecasts that turn into self-fufulling prophecies. Classic thing for anxious people to do. 

Ways to negate this: 

1. Test out you predicitions. You might think this will happen, but is this the truth? Be skeptical of your predicitions, and test them like a scientist. 

2. Be prepared to take risks. 'A ship is safe in a habour, but that's not what it was built for'

3. Understand your past experiences don't determine your future experiences. 

"Typically, fortune-telling stops you from taking action. It can also become a
bit of a self-fulfilling prophecy. If you keep telling yourself that you won’t
enjoy that party, you’re liable to make that prediction come true. Same goes
for meeting new people and trying new things. So, put on your party gear, ask
him out for dinner, and book yourself in for some hang-gliding."

--------------------------------

4. Mind reading: Take your guesses with a pinch of salt. 

We often think people are thinking negative things about you, or have negative intentions or emotions. - We're chatting with someone & they yawn, so we immeditiately think we are boring & should stop talking. But maybe they just had a late night. 

Ways to negate this: 

1. Generate alternative reasons for the event. 
2. Consider your guesses may be wrong. 
3. Get more information. 

------------------------------------

5. Emotional Reasoning: Emotions aren't facts

Emotions aren't hard facts. Look for counter evidence for your opinion. 

1. Take notice of your thoughts - you aren't your thoughts
2. Ask yourself how I'd view this situation differently if i was calmer. 
3. Give yourself time to allow your feelings to subside - your feelings could be due to your current emotional state or just fatigue - review the situation when you're in a better state of mind

-------------------------------------

6. Overgeneralising: drawing big conclusions from one event

"This is always happening to me"

"Nothing goes right"

"You become angry easily. Travelling to see a friend, you’re delayed by a
fellow passenger who cannot find the money to pay her train fare. You
think, ‘This is typical! Other people are just so stupid’, and you become
tense and angry."

" You tend to feel guilty easily. You yell at your child for not understanding
his homework and then decide that you’re a thoroughly rotten parent"

1. Get perspective - is this really the truth? People in poorer countries, people who have it harder
2. Suspend judgement 
3. Be specific - your over generalisation might come from just one area that you need to examine or improve - for example you get angry at your kids & conclude your a thouroughly bad parent. That isnt true, maybe you just need to work on this part, but it doesnt negate all your other areas.

------------------------------------------

7. Labelling: Give up the rating game.

Labelling things with a global rating, or as good or bad or someone is a loser or stupid.

"Strive to avoid labelling yourself, other people, and the world around you.
Accept that they’re complex and ever-changing (see Chapter 12 for more on
this). Recognise evidence that doesn’t fit your labels, in order to help you
weaken your conviction in your global rating"

1. Allow for varying degrees. Temperature as degrees instead of hot/cold
2. Celebrate complexities. The world, yourself & everyone else is complex. You can never put a label on an ever changing, complex system.

"When you label a person or aspect of the world in a global way, you exclude
potential for change and improvement. Accepting yourself as you are is a
powerful first step towards self-improvement.
"

------------------------------------------

8. Making Demands: Thinking Flexibly 

Extreme thoughts & beliefs, that is one that have "ought to", "have to", "need to", "must", "should" are often problematic since they are rigid & extreme. They don't allow any flexiblity to occur, & therefore will lead to more unhealhty emotions. You don't adapt to reality as well as you could. 

Example: - you believe you must have acceptance from other people, therefore you'll feel anxious trying to prove this true, & when you don't you feel like you've failied. 

"You believe that you absolutely should never let people down. Therefore,
you rarely put your own welfare first. At work, you do more than your
fair share because you don’t assert yourself, and so you often end up
feeling stressed and depressed."

-Holding flexible preferences about yourself, other people & the world is a healthy alternative to demands & infelixble rules. 

1. Pay attention to language - replace words like 'must', 'need', 'have to'
2. Limit approval seeking - can you replace your need for approval to just have a preference for approval. 
3. Understand the world doesn't play to your own rules


"When you hold rigid demands about the way things ‘have got to be’, you
have no margin for deviation or error. You leave yourself vulnerable to experiencing exaggerated emotional disturbance when things in life just don’t go your way"


--------------------------------

Mental filtering: Keep an open mind

- We have a tendency to only choose to take in information that fits with our biases instead of getting a whole picture of reality. This could be you don't feel like your achieveing anything, but you've got a filter on what achievement looks like. 

- Self fufilling prophecies - you think you are unlikable, so you tend to only gather information that fits that theory. Purposely choose information outside of your preferences. 

1. Gather evidence actively outside of your preferred infomration intake.
2. Examine your filters closely - are you shifting information through you 'I'm a failure filter' or "I'm successful filter" 

-------------------------------

Disqualifying the positive

You process information through the filter of "i'm worhtless" so when you get a promotion at work, you filter it as 'this doesn't count becuase anyone could get this.'

You think you are unlovable, someone says they're grateful for you & love you, but disqualfy this because you think they actually feel sorry for me. 

1. Keep track of how you repond to positive data - do you find a neutral or negative in the positive data? 	When you catch yourself doing this, can you reframe the event, highlighting the positive of it. "It was _you_ who got the promotion"

2. Say thnakyou to compliments & take them on board instead of turning them down or trying to avoid them.

--------------------------------

Low Frustation Tolerance: realising you can bear the unbearable

Magnifying discomfort (over generalising) & not tolerating temporary discomfort. Assumeing when something is hard to tolerate, it is 'intoreable'. 

Foster a habit of a high frustrastion tolerance: you look for things that are high frustration & identify as someone who can tolerate high frustration. 

Examples in our life: Bad nights with Willow - this is difficult to tolerate therefore it's intoreable. How we percieve it makes it so. 

1. Develop a habit of taking on hard things that need high tolerance of discomfort - disciplin, doing thigs when we don't want to do them. 

2. Self-talk yourself for the ability to withstand pain. 

------------------------------------

Removing yourself from the centre of the universe. 

You think alot of things happening are due to you. Your friend didn't call, it must be because they don't like me. Or this happened, so it must be my fault. 

Science can help us with this, showing how insignificant we are in the scheme of things, so the burden of thinking everything is our fault isn't left with us. 

1. Consider alternatives to what is being said in your head. 



----------------------------------------------- 



Alot of the problems we have is that we interpret events in a negative way - through a negative filter of thoughts, we create a story that confirms a negative belief about ourselves, causing us to repsond in an unhealthy way, wither emotionally (depressed or anxious) or a behaviour like avoidance.

We can counter act this by being scientists with our thoughts:

- Constantly being on lookout for negative thoughts or that how we are responding to an event is determined by what thoughts we had about it. 

- Treat our thoughts as hypothesis - we need to test them & we need to find contridictory data. 

- Consider an alternative if you have an extreme thought or take an extreme stance 

- Pose questions to your thoughts: How would someone in a thrid world country react to this? How would I react if I wasn't as tired? What if this is a negative filter I processing in this?   Can I find someone of a different stance and see what they say?   

- Even if you end being right, there is always an alternative way to filter the event that doesn't lead to unhealthy emotions or behaviours. Say you did get fired from that job like you thought - Maybe it was for the best? Maybe it was a wakeup call to work on my skills in this area? - How can you frame the event through a different lens, then self confirming beliefs about yourself. 


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"A crucial step in CBT is to make the thought–feeling link or B-to-C connection;
that is, seeing clearly for yourself the connection between what goes through
your mind and your resulting emotions. When you see this connection, it can
help you to make much more sense of why to challenge and change your
thoughts."


According to Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, extreme & rigid thoughts & beliefs have more tendency to lead to unhealthy emotions & behaviors, as they leave little wiggle room for alternative realities. Beware when you pick up an extreme belief with little flexibility.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Writing down specific negative thoughts can be good to objectively see them, so you can treat them as hypothesis's to be tested, instead of absolute truths. 

Take you thoughts, especially negative ones, with a bucket of salt. 

Goal is to identify Negative automatic thoughts (NATs) and challenge their truth by provide alternatives to them by asking questions about them. Is this actually true? If I was feeling better would I think this is a true thought? Is this a rigid thought?

THe process of CBT is to train ones mind to think more flexiblly & constructively. 


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some intrusive thoughts like OCD, health anxiety, jealousy can be made worse if we engage in them. Steering clear of using the ABC method can be good for these, and allowing to live with them simultaneously - meditation of allowing thoughts to pass through without engaging with them. 

Devise alternative theories that compete with your anxious causing thought so they can be compared wether they are actually true. 

Survey Method - getting perspective if anyone else experiences these senstaions: 

1. Describe the problem. Henry’s convinced that his intrusive thoughts
about his family being hurt in a car accident are unusual, and mean that
he has to protect his family by changing the image in his mind to them
being happy at a party.
2. Formulate a prediction. Henry comes up with the prediction ‘No one
will admit to having the kind of thoughts I have’. He rates his strength of
belief as 70 per cent.
3. Execute an experiment. Henry tests his perception that his images are
abnormal by devising a checklist of intrusive thoughts and asking his
friends and family members to tick any that they experience.
4. Examine the results. Henry’s surprised at the variety of thoughts that
people report entering their minds. Henry concludes that perhaps his
images aren’t so abnormal after all. He re-rates his conviction in his original prediction as 15 per cent. Henry also learns that other people simply discount their unpleasant images and don’t worry that they
mean anything sinister.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

USING SCIENTIFIC EXPERIMENTS TO DEBUG YOUR THOUGHTS and the truth they hold. 

When engaging in a behaviour experiement, you are looking for competing threories to the thoughts you find cause unhealthy consequences. 

1. Decide what constitues a yes or no answer. 
2. Plan what to do if the prediciton does come true - reframing the result.
3. Don't be biased with your result - getting a second opinion - your not using thinking errors like declineing positive thinking, extrapolating mind-reading
4. Avoid relying on saftey behaviours that can help confirm your preditiction, like you didn't have the thought becuase you did use OCD behaviours, 


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

REFOCUSING YOUR ATTENTION & RETRAINING YOUR AWARENESS

A key insight from mindfulness:  No matter how negative or troubling your thoughts are, they are not the problem. It's the importance or meaning you attach to these thoughts that cause the problem.  View your thoughts as thoughts, not as facts.

Steer your awareness and the way you view the world away from negative interpretations: Go for 'Wow, how amazing is that', just by saying that it primes the brain to look for the positive. Instead of, _throught habit_, going staright to the negative. 

TASK CONCENTRATION 

Practicing redirecting your attention away from yourself, thoughts & getting caught up in bodily sensations, and becoming focused on the task your carrying out. 

"With practice, you can be both task- and environment-focused rather than
self-focused, even in situations that you regard as highly threatening."

------------------------------------------------- 

OVERCOMING ANXIETYS 

1. Start in the shallow end - practice in easier situations - if your anxious about socialising at parties, start with talking to one person & work your way up from there. 

2. Work your way up to harder situations - more threatening situations

-------------------------------------------------

MINDFULNESS: 

Observing thoughts & allowing them to pass by - just like watching a train passing by. Don't have to engage in them, or stop them, just allow them to pass by. 

"Another version of the exercise is to imagine that you’re standing on the side
of a reasonably busy road. Each passing vehicle represents your thoughts
and sensations. Just watch the cars go by. Observe and accept them passing.
Don’t try to hitch-hike, redirect the flow of traffic, or influence the cars in any
way."

Were we put our focus  attention is how we experience the world. 

------------------------------------------------
I think therefore I feel

There are healthy & unhealthy emotions.   

Given an event that occurs, say you percieve a threat walking on the street, an unhealthy thought response would be "this person will kill me", this is an extreme-rigid thought. The behaviour & emotional response to this is going to be different to percieving the threat, and concluding "their's a very low percentage that this threat will happen. I'll deal with it if it happens in a very unlikely case." - Doesn't blow the threat out of proportion - has flexible view of the world that doesn't lead to negative consequences. 

Unhealthy emotion | Healthy alternative
Guilt			  |	Remorse   
Depression        | Sadness

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Healthy/Unhealthy response example:

"Imagine that you have an elderly aunt who needs your help to continue
living independently. You usually visit your aunt at the weekend and do
jobs that she’s too frail to do for herself, like changing light bulbs and
cleaning windows. Last weekend you went skiing with friends instead of
checking in on your aunt. Your aunt got impatient waiting for the light bulb
in her hallway to be changed and tried to do it herself. Unfortunately, your
aunt fell off the chair she was standing on and broke her hip."


Guilty response (an unhealthy negative emotion):

1. Type of thinking: Your thinking becomes rigid and demand-based. You
conclude that you’ve definitely done a bad thing (sinned). You assume
more personal responsibility than may actually be legitimate, discounting or not considering mitigating factors. You may believe that some form of punishment is deserved and/or imminent.

2. Focus of attention: You look for more evidence that you’ve sinned, or
you look for evidence that others hold you responsible for the sin.

3. Behaviour (action tendency): You may desire to escape from guilty
feelings in self-defeating ways – for example, begging for forgiveness,
promising that you’ll never commit a sin again, punishing yourself,
physically or through deprivation, or by attempting to disclaim any
legitimate responsibility for the wrongdoing.

Remorse (a healthy negative emotion). Although the same theme (a broken or failed
moral code, causing hurt or offence to a significant other) still applies, you
experience the following:

1. Type of thinking: Your thinking is more flexible and preference-based.
You look at actions in context and with understanding before making a
judgement about whether you sinned. You consider mitigating factors
of the situation and do not believe that punishment is deserved and/or
imminent.

2. Focus of attention: You don’t look for further evidence that you sinned.
Neither do you look for evidence that others hold you responsible for
the sin.

3. Behaviour (action tendency): You face up to the healthy pain that comes
with knowing that you’ve sinned. You may ask for, but not beg for, forgiveness. You understand the reasons for your wrongdoing and act on that understanding. You may atone for the sin by taking a penalty and/or
making appropriate amends. You avoid defensiveness and excuse-making.

Another interpretation is that you need time to do things you want to do. That she could have waited - did she really need the light bulb fixed? 


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

UNHEALTHY VS HEALTHY EMOTION CAUSES

Unhealthy emotions spring from 'rigid, demand based thinking' - I must be treated with respect at all times

Healthy emotions spring from  'flexible, preference based thinking' - I prefer if people treat me with respect, but they're not bound to do so.

THINKING THROUGHT THE EVENT IN AN _HOLISTIC_ MANNER

Healthy negative emotions are accompanied by largely constructive behaviours, whereas unhealthy negative emotions are accompoanied by self destructive behaviours. 


Using your physical symptoms as a guide to judging the healthiness of your negative feelings isn’t very reliable. They're accompanied by both healthy & unhealthy emotions. 	


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 

Things we do to feel better, like a safety object, actually can make maintain or make our anxious feelings get worse. It is the process of going trhoguht the anxiety & surviving that chnages us for the better. Feel worse, get better. Feel better, get worse. 

--------------------

CONTROL:

Underlying things like anxiety, panic disorders & OCD is control. We can cope with uncertain situations, so we try hard to control them. Giving up control is the best thing you can do. We live in an incertain universe, birth, death & taxes are the only things we can be certain of. Developing beliefs that allow for uncertainity is one way to give up the control - get perspective (lots of people deal with uncertainty and bad things every day). 

Engaging in things we don't want tend to exaherbate them - if we worry we think we can get all the worrying out of the way, supressing thoughts will stop the thoughts - remains down trying to control things out of our control. It will bring on the thing we are so actively trying to avoid. 

-----------------------------------------------------

GOAL SETTING FOR THERAPY 

Therapy is a journey just like anything else. Have a destenation in mind, helps you more likely to arrive where you want to go. 

SPORT - acroynm for setting goals

Spefific - what specific outcome do you want to get. More confident at presentations is more specific than more confident.

Positive - frame to goal as more of something than less of something - more confident instead of less anxious

Observable - Can you see the behviour change - if martians were looking down on earth, what would they see with your new goal?

Realistic - keep your goals realisitic so you don't get discouraged with them. 

Time - set a timeframe to keep focused & efficient. 

A goal statement:

I feel ...... (emotion) about ....... (theme or situation) and to ........ (behaviour) 

---------------------------------------------------------------




      


